Add existing resources (#2642)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/azure/integrations-overview.md

| `PublishAsExisting` | Marks the resource as an existing resource when the application is deployed. |
| `RunAsContainer` | Configures the Azure resource to run locally in a container. For more information, see [Local containers](#local-containers). |
| `RunAsEmulator` | Configures the Azure resource to be emulated. For more information, see [Local emulators](#local-emulators). |
| `RunAsExisting` | Marks the resource as an existing resource when the application is running. |

> [!NOTE]
> Not all APIs are available on all Azure resources. For example, some Azure resources can be containerized or emulated, while others cannot.

When it comes to specifying whether an Azure resource in the app model is an existing resource, you can use the `AsExisting` API. The `AsExisting` method marks the resource as an existing resource in both run and publish modes. You can query whether a resource has been marked as an existing resource, by calling the `IsExisting` extension method on the <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ApplicationModel.IResource>. For more information, see [Mark Azure resources as existing](#mark-azure-resources-as-existing).

> ## Add connection to existing Azure resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add connection to existing Azure resources using connection strings
```

Or do we want to factor it out so that we have a section on the first-class existing resources API and a separate one for connection string based APIs?

Author: That's a good callout, I agree. I'll try updating the sections a bit more to make it all more cohesive and flow more smoothly.

Author: Addressed

### App host run modes

When the app host executes, the [_execution context_](../fundamentals/app-host-overview.md#execution-context) determines whether the app host is in <xref:Aspire.Hosting.DistributedApplicationOperation.Run> or <xref:Aspire.Hosting.DistributedApplicationOperation.Publish> mode. The naming conventions for these APIs indicate the intended action for the resource. For more information on execution modes, see [Execution context](../fundamentals/app-host-overview.md#execution-context).

The following table summarizes the naming conventions used to express Azure resources:

| API | Description |
|--|--|
| `PublishAsConnectionString` | Changes the resource to be published as a connection string reference in the manifest. |

> | `PublishAsContainer` | Changes the resource to be published as a container in the manifest. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

No one uses this method. I think it was a holdover from 8.0 work.

@mitchdenny @davidfowl - should we obsolete this API?

Author: This repo is using it: https://grep.app/search?f.repo=microsoft%2Fkernel-memory&q=PublishAsContainer

Reviewer 2: > This repo is using it: https://grep.app/search?f.repo=microsoft%2Fkernel-memory&q=PublishAsContainer

Not against Azure resources. It is only using it against `.AddContainer`, and IMO it is redundant.

Author: I can remove it from the table.

| `PublishAsExisting` | Marks the resource as an existing resource when the application is deployed. |

> | `RunAsContainer` | Configures the Azure resource to run locally in a container. For more information, see [Local containers](#local-containers). |

Reviewer 2: This is untrue as the Azure resource isn't running locally in a container. This is different than RunAsEmulator because emulators are actually the azure service being emulated. In the 3 cases we use RunAsContainer (Redis, Postgres, SQL), it is the base container of the service that is used. For example instead of Azure Cache for Redis, a regular Redis container is used, with no Azure flavoring to it.

```suggestion
| `RunAsContainer` | Configures an equivalent container to run locally. For more information, see [Local containers](#local-containers). |
```

| `RunAsEmulator` | Configures the Azure resource to be emulated. For more information, see [Local emulators](#local-emulators). |
| `RunAsExisting` | Marks the resource as an existing resource when the application is running. |

> [!NOTE]
> Not all APIs are available on all Azure resources. For example, some Azure resources can be containerized or emulated, while others cannot.

> When it comes to specifying whether an Azure resource in the app model is an existing resource, you can use the `AsExisting` API. The `AsExisting` method marks the resource as an existing resource in both run and publish modes. You can query whether a resource has been marked as an existing resource, by calling the `IsExisting` extension method on the <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ApplicationModel.IResource>. For more information, see [Mark Azure resources as existing](#mark-azure-resources-as-existing).

Reviewer 2: I feel like `AsExisting` should be in the table above. Was there a reason why it isn't?

Reviewer: Table would be fine. We'd also want somewhere to capture the info I shared in https://github.com/dotnet/docs-aspire/pull/2642#discussion_r1964239088. A table might get a little too stuffy if we added all that?

Reviewer 2: I think the info in https://github.com/dotnet/docs-aspire/pull/2642#discussion_r1964239088 belongs in a paragraph form here. 

Having `AsExisting` in the table calls attention to it and puts it on the same level as RunAsExisting and PublishAsExisting. I think it belongs in the same spot(s).

## Mark Azure resources as existing

In addition to the pre-existing <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ParameterResourceBuilderExtensions.AddConnectionString*> API, .NET Aspire provides expanded support for referencing existing Azure resources. This is achieved through the `PublishAsExisting`, `RunAsExisting`, and `AsExisting` APIs. These APIs allow developers to reference already-deployed Azure resources, configure them, and generate appropriate deployment manifests using Bicep templates.

### Configure existing Azure resources for run mode

The `RunAsExisting` method is used when a distributed application is executing in "run" mode. In this mode, it assumes that the referenced Azure resource already exists and integrates with it during execution without provisioning the resource. To mark an Azure resource as existing, call the `RunAsExisting` method on the resource builder. Consider the following example:

```csharp

> var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder();
> 
> var existingResourceName = builder.AddParameter("existingResourceName");
> 
> var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
>     .RunAsExisting(existingResourceName)
>     .WithQueue("queue");

Author: ```suggestion
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder();
	
var existingServiceBusName = builder.AddParameter("existingServiceBusName");

var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
	  .RunAsExisting(existingServiceBusName);

serviceBus.AddServiceBusQueue("queue");
```

```

The preceding code:

- Creates a new `builder` instance.

> - Adds a parameter named `existingResourceName` to the builder.
> - Adds an Azure Service Bus resource named `messaging` to the builder.
> - Calls the `RunAsExisting` method on the `serviceBus` resource builder, passing the `existingResourceName` parameter—alternatively, you can use the `string` parameter overload.

Author: ```suggestion
- Adds a parameter named `existingServiceBusName` to the builder.
- Adds an Azure Service Bus resource named `messaging` to the builder.
- Calls the `RunAsExisting` method on the `serviceBus` resource builder, passing the `existingServiceBusName` parameter—alternatively, you can use the `string` parameter overload.
```

- Adds a queue named `queue` to the `serviceBus` resource.

### Configure existing Azure resources for publish mode

The `PublishAsExisting` method is used in "publish" mode when the intent is to declare and reference an already-existing Azure resource during publish mode. This API facilitates the creation of manifests and templates that include resource definitions that map to existing resources in Bicep.

To mark an Azure resource as existing in for the "publish" mode, call the `PublishAsExisting` method on the resource builder. Consider the following example:

```csharp

> var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder();
> 
> var existingResourceName = builder.AddParameter("existingResourceName");
> 
> var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
>     .PublishAsExisting(existingResourceName)
>     .WithQueue("queue");

Author: ```suggestion
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder();

var existingServiceBusName = builder.AddParameter("existingServiceBusName");

var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
    .PublishAsExisting(existingServiceBusName);

serviceBus.AddServiceBusQueue("queue");
```

```

The preceding code:

- Creates a new `builder` instance.
- Adds a parameter named `existingResourceName` to the builder.
- Adds an Azure Service Bus resource named `messaging` to the builder.
- Calls the `PublishAsExisting` method on the `serviceBus` resource builder, passing the `existingResourceName` parameter—alternatively, you can use the `string` parameter overload.
- Adds a queue named `queue` to the `serviceBus` resource.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

By default, the Service Bus parameter reference is assumed to be in the same Azure resource group. However, if it's in a different resource group, you can pass the resource group explicitly as a parameter to correctly specify the appropriate resource grouping.

```

```json
{
  "type": "azure.bicep.v0",
  "connectionString": "{messaging.outputs.serviceBusEndpoint}",
  "path": "messaging.module.bicep",
  "params": {
    "existingResourceName": "{existingResourceName.value}",
    "principalType": "",
    "principalId": ""
  }
}
```

For more information on the manifest file, see [.NET Aspire manifest format for deployment tool builders](../deployment/manifest-format.md).

Additionally, the generated Bicep template will include the `existingResourceName` parameter, which can be used to reference the existing Azure resource. Consider the following generated Bicep template:

```bicep
@description('The location for the resource(s) to be deployed.')
param location string = resourceGroup().location

param existingResourceName string
param principalType string
param principalId string

resource messaging 'Microsoft.ServiceBus/namespaces@2024-01-01' existing = {
  name: existingResourceName
}

output serviceBusEndpoint string = messaging.properties.serviceBusEndpoint
```

> For more information on the generated Bicep template, see [Infrastructure as code](#infrastructure-as-code).

Reviewer: @eerhardt discovered some APIs that are incompatible with the existing resource model. For example, you can't call `UseAccessKeyAuthentication` on an existing Azure Redis resource or `UsePasswordAuthentication` on an existing Postgres resource. We might want to add a warning about that here.

Reviewer 2: You can call these methods, but they just need to "match up" with what is already enabled on the server. For example `UsePasswordAuthentication` on an existing resource works if you pass the username/password in that is already configured on the server.

> ### Express existing Azure resources

Author: Express is the verb that we use when describing how developers write app host code. They express the relationships between resources, or they express configuration within resources, and they express how they function depending on their execution mode. Does that make sense?

> ### Express existing Azure resources

Author: I used _configure_ instead.

The consuming API project uses the connection string information with no knowledge of how the app host configured it. In "publish" mode, the code adds a new Azure Storage resource—which would be reflected in the [deployment manifest](../deployment/manifest-format.md) accordingly. When in "run" mode, the connection string corresponds to a configuration value visible to the app host. It's assumed that any and all role assignments for the target resource have been configured. This means, you'd likely configure an environment variable or a user secret to store the connection string. The configuration is resolved from the `ConnectionStrings__storage` (or `ConnectionStrings:storage`) configuration key. These configuration values can be viewed when the app runs. For more information, see [Resource details](../fundamentals/dashboard/explore.md#resource-details).

> ## Mark Azure resources as existing

Reviewer 2: @captainsafia - what is your thoughts on moving this above `Add existing Azure resources with connection strings`?

Reviewer: I like that with this format we have a segue from the connection strings approach to the bicep one. Although it does make it seem like connection strings are preferred to bicep. We can consider re-arranging it and maybe making the connection string stuff an H3 under existing resources instead of an H2?

Reviewer 2: > We can consider re-arranging it and maybe making the connection string stuff an H3 under existing resources instead of an H2?

I like this idea.

> Although it does make it seem like connection strings are preferred to bicep.

Yes, that was my thinking. I think we should suggest using the new "Existing" feature first, because it works so much better and enables so many more scenarios.

Author: How about we restructure/flow of the article to be the following (only looking at H2s and only highlighting changes to H3):

- Naming conventions and APIs for expressing Azure resources
- Add Azure resources
  - Mark Azure resources as existing
  - Add existing Azure resources with connection strings
- Infrastructure as code
- Publishing

Perhaps both the existing APIs bits and the connection string blurbs should be H3s, under the Add Azure resources heading? Thoughts? Admittedly, there are other H3s and H4s that were omitted from here.

Reviewer 2: I like moving the "as existing" and "connection string" stuff lower than the "typical devloper experience" stuff. We should have the normal cases first - when you add a new resource, not use an existing one. I also like having "as existing" above "connection string". So I think this proposal sounds good to me.

In addition to the pre-existing <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ParameterResourceBuilderExtensions.AddConnectionString*> API, .NET Aspire provides expanded support for referencing existing Azure resources. This is achieved through the `PublishAsExisting`, `RunAsExisting`, and `AsExisting` APIs. These APIs allow developers to reference already-deployed Azure resources, configure them, and generate appropriate deployment manifests using Bicep templates.

### Configure existing Azure resources for run mode

The `RunAsExisting` method is used when a distributed application is executing in "run" mode. In this mode, it assumes that the referenced Azure resource already exists and integrates with it during execution without provisioning the resource. To mark an Azure resource as existing, call the `RunAsExisting` method on the resource builder. Consider the following example:

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder();

> var existingResourceName = builder.AddParameter("existingResourceName");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
var existingResourceName = builder.AddParameter("existingServiceBusName");
```

?

var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
    .RunAsExisting(existingResourceName)
    .WithQueue("queue");
```

The preceding code:

- Creates a new `builder` instance.
- Adds a parameter named `existingResourceName` to the builder.
- Adds an Azure Service Bus resource named `messaging` to the builder.
- Calls the `RunAsExisting` method on the `serviceBus` resource builder, passing the `existingResourceName` parameter.
- Adds a queue named `queue` to the `serviceBus` resource.

> 

Author: I added on to each of these sentences that callout the parameter, stating that there's an alternative `string` overload.

> 

Reviewer 2: We should add that the ServiceBus is assumed to be in the same resource group as your app is using.

### Configure existing Azure resources for publish mode

The `PublishAsExisting` method is used in "publish" mode when the intent is to declare and reference an already-existing Azure resource during publish mode. This API facilitates the creation of manifests and templates that include resource definitions that map to existing resources in Bicep.

To mark an Azure resource as existing in for the "publish" mode, call the `PublishAsExisting` method on the resource builder. Consider the following example:

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder();

var existingResourceName = builder.AddParameter("existingResourceName");

> var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
>     .PublishAsExisting(existingResourceName)
>     .WithQueue("queue");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
    .PublishAsExisting(existingResourceName);
```

WithQueue is obsolete in 9.1

Reviewer 2: If you want to convert it, use:

```
var serviceBus = builder.AddAzureServiceBus("messaging")
    .PublishAsExisting(existingResourceName);

serviceBus.AddServiceBusQueue("queue");
```

AddServiceBusQueue returns the queue resource. (Just like AddDatabase returns the child database resource)

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/dotnet/docs-aspire/issues/2327#issuecomment-2673088907

Author: Good catch, thanks for helping out with this.

```json
{
  "type": "azure.bicep.v0",
  "connectionString": "{messaging.outputs.serviceBusEndpoint}",
  "path": "messaging.module.bicep",
  "params": {
    "existingResourceName": "{existingResourceName.value}",
    "principalType": "",
    "principalId": ""
  }
}
```

For more information on the manifest file, see [.NET Aspire manifest format for deployment tool builders](../deployment/manifest-format.md).

Additionally, the generated Bicep template will include the `existingResourceName` parameter, which can be used to reference the existing Azure resource. Consider the following generated Bicep template:

```bicep
@description('The location for the resource(s) to be deployed.')
param location string = resourceGroup().location

param existingResourceName string
param principalType string
param principalId string

resource messaging 'Microsoft.ServiceBus/namespaces@2024-01-01' existing = {
  name: existingResourceName
}

output serviceBusEndpoint string = messaging.properties.serviceBusEndpoint
```

For more information on the generated Bicep template, see [Infrastructure as code](#infrastructure-as-code).

> [!WARNING]

> > Some APIs are incompatible with existing Azure resources. For example, you cannot call `UseAccessKeyAuthentication` on an existing Azure Cache for Redis resource. Likewise, you cannot call `UsePasswordAuthentication` on an existing Azure PostgreSQL resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When interacting with existing resources that require authentication, ensure the authentication strategy that you are configuring in the Aspire application model aligns with the authentication strategy allowed by the existing resource. For example, it is not possible to use a managed identity against an existing Postgres resource configured with password authentication and vice versa.
```

@eerhardt Can you sanity check my verbiage here?

Reviewer 2: I tweaked the wording a bit. Note that for Postgres and Redis it is possible to enable both Entra auth and keys/password auth at the same time. You can have one or both enabled.
